This project aims to predict risks of depression and anxiety in adult life using influential vari- ables collected during childhood and adolescence from the 1958 British National Child Development Study (NCDS). These variables were collected from cohort members’ responses to questionnaires during their childhood and adolescence at the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th sweeps. Participants were classified into depressed (7%) and normal (93%) groups based on their responses to malaise inven- tory questionnaires during the 4th sweep. Techniques like SMOTE and SMOTEENN were used to address class imbalance during pre-processing. Three feature selection methods were applied to identify most influential factors that may cause depression and anxiety. These include selecting variables based bias along with the information obtained after a general research in the field of psy- chology, using the Random Forest Classifier for feature selection from the entire pre-processed and cleaned dataset, and determining statistical significance with depression through Chi-square tests. Subsequently, variables from bias and two other methods were organised, pre-processed, and tested on various classification models to determine the most effective method for modelling. Additionally, the performances of four classifiers (Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, and Naive Bayes) were compared using the selected variables to identify the most suitable clas- sifier and variable set for the dataset. The hypothesis suggested that the model would effectively predict non-depressive individuals due to class imbalance and the dataset’s complexity, but less so for depressive ones, while still offering valuable insights. The results confirmed this, showing 92% specificity for non-depressive predictions and 53% sensitivity for depressive ones.
